Hello, hello hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today it
is part three of our three-part
mini-series on great queens.
In part one we looked at the
tragic life of Anne Boleyn,
the second wife of Henry VIII.
In part two, we looked at the life
of her daughter, Queen Elizabeth I of
England, and saw how she navigated a
world of men to leave a phenomenal legacy.
And today we are moving abroad, to
Russia, in fact, where we will meet
another strong, powerful woman, a woman
who had such an impact on Russia that she
earned herself the nickname “The Great”.
Yes, it’s Catherine, the 18th
century Empress of Russia.
Her story is one of power,
deceit, sex and rebellion, though
not necessarily in that order.
OK then, let’s get right into it.
In 1744, a fourteen-year-old
Prussian princess arrived in Russia.
The princess was named
Sophie Friederike Auguste.
She was charming and quick-witted,
and impressed everyone she met.
She had been brought there at the
request of the childless Empress,
Elizabeth I, as a potential match for her
nephew, Peter, who was 15 at the time.
It wasn’t, in fact, the
first time the pair had met.
They were second cousins, and had
met when Sophie was 10-years-old.
She hated Peter the first time
they met, and she hated him
even more four years later.
He was a pale, sickly looking
boy, who already stunk  of
alcohol despite his young age.
Nevertheless, the pair would marry,
but it would be an event that would
ultimately lead to the princess rising up
against her husband, overthrowing him and
taking the Russian throne for herself.
The Princess, this “Sophie”, was of course
Catherine, Catherine The Great of Russia.
Like the English queens of parts
one and two of this mini-series,
she had to survive in a hostile
male-dominated environment, fending
off constant threats and conspiracies.
Like Elizabeth I, and unlike Anne Boleyn,
she succeeded, at least in terms of
holding on to power until her last breath.
And although the outcomes of
Elizabeth I and Catherine the Great
are similar, the techniques to get
there were very different, and in
many ways further underline the
hypocrisy and double standards  that
female rulers had to put up with.
So, where to start?
Well, let’s start with her character.
Like Anne Boleyn and Elizabeth, she was
clearly a strong-willed, intelligent,
charismatic woman, more than capable
of holding her own in the company of
men who thought themselves superior.
She had grown up with a fashionable
French governess and received a modern
education influenced by the Enlightenment,
the contemporary philosophical movement
based on the importance of reason.
As such, she was an avid reader of
political works from authors like
Plutarch, Tacitus, Machiavelli
and Voltaire, all which highlight
the importance of public
opinion and the shaping of it.
After arriving in Russia and marrying
Peter, which she did when she was a
mere 16-years-old, she set about turning
herself into a full Russian princess.
Gone was the name of Sophie, she would
now be called Yekaterina, or, Catherine,
echoing the legacy of Catherine the I,
the legendary wife of Peter the Great.
She converted to the Russian orthodox
church, and became fluent in Russian.
This was in stark contrast to
her husband, Peter, who made
no secret of his preference for
Prussia and all things Prussian.
At court, Catherine was popular
with nobles and servants alike.
She treated her servants
well, and was quick-witted and
funny when in conversation.
Peter, on the other hand was
neurotic, boring, and an alcoholic.
It couldn’t have been a worse match,
but of course, marriages in the 18th
century were not about matches of
character, or matters of the heart;
the objective was to form an alliance,
and above all, to produce an heir.
As such, on their wedding night, Catherine
might have dreaded the thought, but
she knew what was expected of her.
She waited upstairs in the
bedroom, ready to perform her duty.
Peter did come to bed several hours
later, but was completely drunk and
passed out, fell over onto the floor.
The marriage was not consummated that
evening, and there are some theories that
the pair never actually slept together,
so much was their hatred for one another.
Whether this is true or not,
Catherine did fall pregnant.
Over the next decade, Catherine, in fact,
fell pregnant several times, losing the
baby each time, until 1754, when she
successfully gave birth to a son, Paul.
Now, it’s widely believed that both
Catherine and Peter were having
affairs with other people, so Paul
was almost certainly not Peter’s son.
But this didn’t really matter.
The important thing was
that people thought he was.
And even though she had done what
was expected and produced a child,
Catherine sensed her position was
becoming increasingly insecure.
Given her trouble with previous
pregnancies, great care was given to
her last pregnancy and her physical
activities were largely stopped.
This meant no more attendance at Empress
Elizabeth’s grand balls and other events
at court; no more working her charm.
Essentially, she had fewer allies,
fewer friends in high places.
Yes, she might have been married to the
heir, but she knew he hated her, and
the feeling was most certainly mutual.
Moreover, Peter was only
getting more cruel towards her.
Not only was he verbally abusive
towards Catherine, threatening to
divorce her and send her to a convent,
but he would appear in public with
his mistress, embarrassing her in
front of Russia’s rich and powerful.
As such, she began to grow fearful
that she would be sent away into
exile once he took the throne.
But Peter’s vulgar behaviour and open
adoration for his homeland, Prussia
– which Russia had fought against in
the Seven Years’ War – this was all
earning him more and more enemies.
Even Elizabeth began to favour
Catherine as heir to the throne,
often deriding, making fun of
Peter as “her foolish nephew”.
Always mindful of her future,
Catherine began taking steps
to ensure her own protection.
She befriended foreign ambassadors and
built up a network of informants who
ensured she was always up to date with
the latest goings on at court, and who
could provide her with secrets to be used
as leverage in any potential schemes.
And several of these allies
and informants were far more
than friends and acquaintances.
They would also become her lovers.
One such man, who would prove to be
vital for her future, was a military
officer called Grigory Orlov, who
she began an affair with around 1760.
Just a few years after their affair
began, Empress Elizabeth died and
Peter was thrust onto the throne of a
country he had spent his life despising.
Perhaps unsurprisingly, he proved
to be an immensely unpopular leader.
In the days immediately after becoming
Emperor, he had disrespectfully – and
true to style, drunkenly – publicly
celebrated the death of his aunt,
the popular Empress Elizabeth.
What’s more, his support for
Russia’s enemy, Prussia, became
intolerable to many at court.
In an effort to protect herself
and her position, Catherine and her
lover Orlov began conspiring against
Peter with the help of Orlov’s
brothers and some other nobles.
Catherine knew Peter was strongly disliked
amongst the military and thought that she
would not struggle to gain their support.
It didn’t take long.
Just six months after the crown
was placed on Peter’s head, he
was unceremoniously booted out,
kicked out, by his wife, no less.
On the 9th July 1762, while Peter was
outside St Petersburg, the 33-year-old
Catherine sensed her opportunity.
She dressed in a Russian military uniform,
led the army through the streets of St
Petersburg and declared herself Empress.
And, to cut a long story short, it worked.
When Peter returned to the palace
he surrendered to his wife and
abdicated, hoping he would be
exiled to his beloved Prussia.
But Catherine was no fool.
She knew that if she did this
he could lead an uprising
against her in the future.
What’s more, he had clearly not built
up any goodwill with his wife, who
would refer to him in her memoirs
as both ‘an idiot and a drunkard’.
She hated him, and was not
going to do him any favours.
So she instead had him arrested and
placed under house arrest, with one of
the guards being a man called Grigory
Potemkin, who we’ll meet again shortly.
Eight days later, Peter was dead.
Now, the cause of Peter’s death
is still unknown to this day.
Officially it was reported as due
to haemorrhoids but the more likely
story is that he was murdered,
potentially by Orlov’s brother.
Whether natural or unnatural causes,
having him out of the way was
certainly helpful for Catherine.
Two months later, as her son Paul
was too young to rule, Catherine
was crowned Empress in his place.
She was acutely aware of the need
to get off on the right foot,
and project an image of strength.
Like Elizabeth I two centuries
before, Catherine knew how important
her image was to her rule and she
cultivated this carefully, following
the specific examples of two powerful
Russian female rulers, Catherine I and
her predecessor, Empress Elizabeth.
And she trod a careful balance
between femininity, of embracing
her female side, and masculinity.
For her lavish coronation
ceremony, she commissioned a brand
new crown, an incredibly grand
and expensive piece, which was
adorned with over 5,000 diamonds.
As Empress, her dresses were often
designed with subtle touches that
aligned them with men’s military
clothing, making her look more like
a glamorous but powerful soldier
than a supposedly “weak” woman.
Now, 18th-century Russia, it should
be said, had seen four female rulers
and the country was, by and large,
more tolerant to female rule than
England had been, for example.
But Catherine still faced considerable
scrutiny stemming from her gender.
And let’s not forget that she
was, in the minds of some, a
Prussian-born usurper, a foreigner
who had stolen the Russian crown.
So, she needed to tread very carefully.
But it worked.
She fitted herself into a man’s
world, showing that her gender was
no limitation to her rule, and she
became an extremely adept leader.
She would work tirelessly from morning
until night, striving to bring Russia in
line with its European contemporaries.
Russia in the 18th century,
let’s not forget, was a very
underdeveloped country in comparison
to most of its Western neighbours.
Its population was 95% rural, and there
was the system of serfdom, essentially
rural slavery, where landowners would own
vast swathes of the country and peasants
were required to farm their land for them.
Catherine did attempt to reform this
system, and showed sympathy for the
plight of the serfs, but ultimately
was unable  to make much progress
with abolishing serfdom, which would
only be fully abolished in 1861.
She grew to realise that the  progressive
reforms that she wanted to put into
place needed to be supported by the
nobles, and persuading them to give up
their, at times, tens of thousands of
slaves really, well, it wasn’t easy.
In fact, under Catherine’s rule,
the plight of the serf actually
deteriorated, it got worse, and
Catherine had to deal with more than a
dozen serf uprisings during her reign.
The bloodiest and most bizarre
came in 1774, and was led not
by a serf but by a former army
officer called Emelyan Pugachev.
Pugachev had managed to convince a
large group of peasants that he was the
deposed emperor Peter – yes the same
Peter who had died 12 years before.
This uprising became the largest
peasant revolt in European history,
with 25,000 peasants fighting against
the state, and 5,000 government
officials and noblemen being killed.
The rebellion lasted two years,
and when it was finally crushed
Catherine showed no mercy.
The rebel leader, Pugachev, was
brought to a square in Moscow,
in front of a large crowd.
He was then beheaded, his head
chopped off, his insides pulled out,
and then he was chopped into pieces.
No, you certainly didn’t want to get on
the wrong side of Catherine The Great.
She was fearless at home, but would also
be remembered as being fearless abroad,
and amassed an impressive amount of
military victories throughout her reign.
Just six years after she took
the throne, in 1768 the Ottoman
Empire had declared war on Russia
after its interference in Poland.
The resulting war, the Russo-Turkish
war, turned out to be a disaster for
the Ottomans and a great victory for
Catherine, resulting in territorial
gains of over half a million square
kilometres, strengthening both the
empire and Catherine’s position as ruler.
Some of the lands were even seized
from one of her former lovers, a
man called Stanisław Poniatowski,
who Catherine had, in her early
reign, helped become King of Poland.
And on the subject of lovers, it is
worth spending some time talking about
this aspect of Catherine’s reign and
character, because this highlights
not only her cunning and intelligence,
but also the glaring double standards
and misogyny she had to face.
There is little doubt that Catherine
had lovers, that she had affairs
with men who were not Peter.
I mean, who can blame her, Peter
sounds absolutely vile and she
clearly found him repulsive.
In terms of just how many lovers,
she is remembered in the history
books as being a highly sexualised
woman, a woman with a large amount
of lovers, but historians believe the
number is somewhere between 12 and 22.
And, had she been a king, clearly
this wouldn’t have mattered at all,
it wouldn’t even have been a topic
of interest, nobody would have spent
any time even thinking about it.
Having lovers and mistresses was
completely expected behaviour for a
king, but it has become a black spot
on Catherine’s legacy, even to the
extent that people spread rumours
that she died while having sex with
a horse - which I should add, is
completely untrue, there is zero
evidence of anything like that happening.
Now, in some cases Catherine chose some of
her lovers for perfectly rational reasons
of the heart, she was attracted to them.
In other cases, she chose them because
of their potential political usefulness.
We already heard about Grigory Orlov,
the military officer who helped
her seize the throne from Peter.
In 1774, 12 years after Peter
had died, the 45 year-old empress
took another officer as a lover.
His name was Grigory Potemkin.
If you remember him from earlier
on in this episode, he was one
of officers guarding Peter.
Potemkin was a skilled officer and
intelligent man, and the pair embarked on
a two-year love affair which led to the
ambitious Potemkin being rewarded with
significant power in the Russian empire.
But, it wasn’t to last.
Potemkin was too ambitious, he
had too much power, and many
began to see Catherine giving
him top jobs as an example of a
woman submitting to her lover.
What’s more he was deeply
insecure, jealous of Catherine, and
fearful that she would leave him.
Enough was enough, and the affair
ended, but, if anything, their political
relationship grew, and he became an even
more valued political advisor to her.
Now, aside from her military victories,
Catherine had also enacted a number of
forward-thinking reforms in an attempt to
introduce Enlightenment thought to Russia.
In 1775 she reorganised the structure
of the empire’s territory for more
efficient governance; and in  1786 she
introduced a network of free schools,
well, free as long as you weren’t a serf.
And throughout her reign, her patronage
of the arts also transformed St Petersburg
into a modern cultural haven, and–like
Elizabeth I of England–her reign has
been dubbed “The Golden Age” of Russia.
In one episode that I think particularly
highlights both her understanding
of public perception and her
appreciation for reason and science,
she was also the first person in
Russia to receive the smallpox jab.
But her rule wasn’t to last forever.
On the 5th November 1796, her
day started like any other.
This “Great” empress prepared her
coffee as she always did and she
spent hours going over her papers.
Some time that evening, the
67-year-old Catherine had a stroke,
and she died the following day.
After her death, her son Paul took the
throne, being sure to burn her papers in
case she had written him out of her will.
He then took steps in avenging what he
believed to be wrongs done to his father.
He dug up Peter and gave him the state
funeral he never received, and then, shock
horror, he ordered for his mother and
father to be buried next to one another.
Catherine was condemned to be alongside
her hated husband for eternity.
She was back, in a strange
way, to how it had all begun.
But not without leaving a
monumental impact on her beloved
adopted country, of Russia.
She had expanded the land of the
empire, strengthened its economy, and
transformed it into a modern European
power that would rival its contemporaries.
And, like the subjects of parts one and
two of this mini-series, Anne Boleyn
and Elizabeth I over in England, she
had done this as a woman in a world
of often poisonous conspiring men.
Much like Elizabeth I, Catherine
had subtly adapted her image to
portray herself as more powerful.
For Elizabeth, she did this by
insisting she was a virgin to avoid
marrying and losing power to a husband.
Catherine went in the opposite
direction, often using her love
affairs to advance her power by using
the alliances and connections of the
men who she became involved with.
The strategies of both queens
clearly worked, in terms of their
huge legacies that they left
on their respective countries.
And in the case of Catherine, perhaps
it’s even more impressive to think
that she fought against all of this
discrimination, she managed not just to
survive but to thrive as Empress, and
that she would go down as one of the
greatest leaders in Russian history.
And to think, she wasn’t
even really Russian.
Ok then, that is it for today’s episode on
Catherine the Great, and with this comes
the end of this three-part mini-series.
As always I would love to know what
you thought of this episode, and
of this mini-series in general?
For the Russian listeners out there, how
do you feel about Catherine The Great?
What lasting impact has she had on Russia?
What other powerful female queens could
we have added to this mini-series?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.